[DecaLog](https://perfops.one/decalog) have the ability to log WordPress events.

It can log events to fill an events log, to record a crash report, to send an alert or to allow debugging in console.

Whatever the destination of the event, the process is always the same: DecaLog will first capture events generated by the core of WordPress and themes / plugins; it will then enrich these events with many details regarding their triggering before passing them to loggers. At this point, it is the responsibility of each logger that receives an event to record it - with its own level of detail - or to discard it.

## Anatomy of an event
An ___event___ is mainly composed of:
- A __channel__, which is the type of "execution pipe" that triggered the ___event___. It can take the following values: `CLI` (command-line interface), `CRON` (cron job), `AJAX` (Ajax request), `XMLRPC` (XML-RPC request), `API` (Rest API request), `FEED` (Atom/RDF/RSS feed), `WBACK` (site backend), `WFRONT` (site frontend).
- A __level__, which represents the severity of the ___event___. This level is set by the ___listener___, regarding what triggered the ___event___. It can take the following values (from the lowest severity to the highest severity): `DEBUG`, `INFO`, `NOTICE`, `WARNING`, `ERROR`, `CRITICAL`, `ALERT`, `EMERGENCY`.
- A __timestamp__, which is the time when ___event___ was triggered.
- A versioned __source__, which is the component or the subsystem where the ___event___ is triggered. It may be things like `PHP`/`7.2` or `WordPress`/`5.2.2` and so on...
- The __class__ of the source, which can take the following values: `core`, `plugin`, `theme`, `db`, `php`.
- A __message__ in plain text. It is always in English: messages are not localized.
- A numerical __code__, which may be everything which makes sense regarding the ___event___ (an error code, for instance).

Depending on each ___loggers___ type or settings, an ___event___ may contains many other fields which are automatically detected and filled by DecaLog. For example, an ___event___ may contain a __trace ID__, a __user name__, etc.

## Conventions
An ___event___ respects some rules and adheres to some standards:

### Levels
In order to be similar to other log management systems and to maintain consistency between all the DecaLog ___listeners___, the ___levels___ are used as follows:
* `DEBUG` - Only used for events related to application/system debugging. Must not concern standard, important or critical events. _Ex.: "Plugin table xxx updated.", "Textdomain yyy loaded."_.
* `INFO` - Simple informational messages which can be forgotten. _Ex.: "User xxx is logged-out.", "New comment on post yyy."_.
* `NOTICE` - Normal but significant conditions. _Ex.: "The configuration of plugin xxx was modified.", "The database is 70% full."_.
* `WARNING` - A significant condition indicating a situation that may lead to an error if recurring or if no action is taken. _Ex.: "Page not found.", "Comment flood triggered."_.
* `ERROR` - Minor operating error which requires investigation and preventive treatment. _Ex.: "The file could not be opened.", "The feature could not be loaded."_.
* `CRITICAL` - Operating error which requires investigation and corrective treatment. _Ex.: "Uncaught Exception!", "Database error in query xxx."_.
* `ALERT` - Major operating error which requires immediate corrective treatment. _Ex.: "The WordPress database is corrupted."_.
* `EMERGENCY` - A panic condition (unusable system). _Ex.: "The WordPress database is down.", "Parse error: syntax error, unexpected 'if' (T_IF)."_.

### Codes
If the ___event___ relate to a HTTP condition, the ___code___ should be, as much as possible, the HTTP response code.

The code `0` means: "unknown", "not significant" or "not an error".

### Messages
The first 30-40 characters of the message allow the user to understand, at a glance, what the message is.