# DecaLog

__DecaLog__ is a free WordPress plugin to capture and log events on your site. It allows to view these events in your WordPress dashboard and send them to logging or alerting services.

See [WordPress directory page](https://wordpress.org/plugins/decalog/).

__DecaLog__ is a tool which aims to:
* capture events generated by the core of WordPress and themes / plugins;
* enrich these events with many details regarding their triggering;
* record these events in the WordPress database and/or send them to external services for logging, monitoring and alerting;
* view (and filter) events recorded in the WordPress database.

It supports multisite logs delegation and contains many features to help to protect personal information (user pseudonymization, IP obfuscation, etc.).

It can be used in dev/debug phases or on production sites.

At this time, DecaLog can send events:
* by mail (alerting);
* in the browser console (for debugging purpose);
* to its internal logging storage and viewer;
* to external logger, like Syslog or Fluentd;
* to external alerting services, like Pushover or Slack;
* to local or network storage (with file rotation);

Based on the amazing [Monolog](https://github.com/Seldaek/monolog) logger, DecaLog is a free and open source plugin for WordPress. It integrates many other free and open source works (as-is or modified). Please, see 'about' tab in the plugin settings to see the details.

## Installation

### WordPress method (recommended)

1. From your WordPress dashboard, visit _Plugins | Add New_.
2. Search for 'DecaLog'.
3. Click on the 'Install Now' button.

You can now activate **DecaLog** from your _Plugins_ page.

### Git method
1. Just clone the repository in your `/wp-content/plugins/` directory:
```bash
cd ./wp-content/plugins
git clone https://github.com/Pierre-Lannoy/wp-decalog.git decalog
```

## Support

_- TBD -_

## Contributing

_- TBD -_
